---
layout: post
title: Love is a matter of physics; chemistry comes later
---

Love is said to be 'chemistry between two'. I find 'love is more a matter of physics', chemistry comes much later. Any person who has studied physics up to certain level will agree that love begins and breaks, increases or diminishes, as per the rule of some branch of physics or other.

-----

It begins with Optics or Light. It is not for nothing that the phrase ‘love at first sight’ has come into usage much before any chemical reaction. Similarly, when it is said 'love is blind' it is when one draws curtain on light, metaphorically. 

Sound or Acoustics come next. It begins with ‘Hi’ or ‘Hello’, gradually shifting to saying sweet nothing, whispering, humming or singing -- all coming under the category of Acoustics. Some like it mute, others loud. It is again a matter of decibel. No wonder if music, not possible without sound, is rated as the highest form of expressing love. Man invented telegraph, telephone, microwaves to talk to his loved ones across the globe.

Gravitation, thy other name being attraction, is considered to be the strongest force to bring two objects closer. It is also the rule of gravitation under which an object is attracted towards an image in a curve or in circles. This explains why heroes in films gyrate around trees and shrubs to reach the heroine. If they go straight, they may collide or derail.

Magnetism explains how magnetic fields work, how opposite poles attract each other. It is as simple. Why same poles sometimes attract each other in love is lateral physics. Technologically advanced nations are now  developing magnetically elevated trains for smoother and faster ride.

Electricity from lightening was discovered by while flying kite, trying to connect. One can see the glow in people in love as in electricity passing through delicate wires in incandescent bulbs. To shine brighter and impress more, man invented LED and CFL.

Mechanics is the branch of physics to find ways and means to achieve love. Man discovered wheel, car, steam engine and aircraft, as also pliers and gears to reach his image faster. Some poet even compared man’s sending rocket to moon as manifestation of love. 

Man needs Energy, also called Heat, even to think and brood. Love is a very strong force. It has to obey the rule of interchangeable potential energy, kinetic energy, static energy, dynamic energy and other forms of energy.

Newton's law of 'Inertia of Rest' and 'Inertia of Motion' explain why some people remain melancholic and others become romantic. As per Newton's third law also, "For every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction." First the man says. "I love you." Love advances only after the woman says, "I love you, too."

When asked to explain the theory of relativity, Albert Einstein said it in layman's language, "An hour sitting with a pretty girl on a bench in park passes like a minute, but sitting on a hot stove for a minute seems like an hour." Through this famous quote, he inadvertently established an all-time correlation between love and physics.

Physics also explain bonding and breaking free in love. The concept of nuclear family, as borrowed from Nuclear Physics, explains how protons and neutrons are held together by electrons (comparable to man, woman and children). Love birds prefer to stay put in nests (read 'nucleus') but need fresh and greener pastures to sustain. 

Archimedes' principle on fluid mechanics partially explains how the bond is disturbed when a body or mass is immersed in a closed space. It displaces another mass equal in weight or volume. 

Bonding is explained in detail is chemistry, but it comes into picture later. In fact, chemistry begins where physics ends, like  when a molecule comes into contact with another molecule. 

Metaphysics is that branch of knowledge which attempts to answer what empirical sciences cannot, like what is life, what is love and hate, what is heartbreak -- an entirely new world indeed!

EOM